\section{Optimizing for Energy Efficiency}

Given the availability of advanced hardware design tools, it is possible to
model and simulate performance of an unimplemented architecture with decent
accuracy. However, modeling power consumption is a way more elaborate process:
current techniques works on a very low level and uses circuit-level models to
obtain energy metrics. This method makes them accurate, but also heavy and time
consuming to execute. Being able to rapidly prototype and visualize how changes
in the microarchitecture affects energy performance is an advantage when
designing energy efficient hardware. Some solutions already exists
\cite{bruno2005rtl,ponomarev2002accupower}, but most of them inspect energy
consumption at very fine granularity and requires ASIC synthesis of HDL code to
work. During the design process, there is a great need for tools that help
developers predict the changes in power consumption when new features are
implemented.

The immediate lack of a system that is easy to use and easy to set up motivates
the creation of a new high-level tool. We introduce PET; a tool that is able to
estimate power usage over time for a given workload on a given architecture. It
will use an energy metric profile estimated from similar processors together
with a simulator trace log to calculate energy usage. Using this approach, PET
will be able to detect if hardware modifications done to the simulation level
model will be beneficial in the realized hardware. PET will also tell if a
processor implementation is more energy efficient than an other given a specific
workload, thus it can help building workload optimized tiles for the SHMAC
project \cite{shmacwebpage}. Using the features of PET, one can also adjust the
energy metric profile and simulate power usage as if one component was cheaper
or more expensive to use (in terms of energy). This will enable hardware designers to
understand which optimizations are most beneficial and identify possible routes
of exploration in their journey of processor energy optimization.

