\section{Hardware Simulators}

As computer architecture development meets more challenging demands, a versatile
set of software tools have been developed to help the designers. In this
collection of tools lies a set of computer architecture simulators meant to
evaluate processors at the architectural level. They provide the ability to
model hardware at a higher abstraction layer than what is expressed by the
underlying circuit.

\subsection{A Brief Comparison of Hardware Simulators}
\label{subsec:simulators}
To support our power estimation tool, a simulator front-end must provide a good
picture of events that occur in a hardware implementation of the architecture.
The out-of-order property significantly increases the level of complexity which
the simulator must handle. The following simulators were considered:

\begin{description}
\item[Sniper] \hfill\\
    Sniper is a high-speed, multicore, multi-threaded and cycle-accurate
    computer architecture simulator
    \cite{sniperwebpage,carlson2011sniper,carlson2013ssomta}. It already integrates
    with McPAT \cite{li2009mcpat,li2013mcpat} and it is open source. Sniper only
    works with x86 targets, and is therefore not applicable for simulation of
    ARM-based architectures.

\item[SimpleScalar] \hfill\\
    SimpleScalar is a popular commercial architectural simulator that comes with
    a free academic license providing full source code
    \cite{burger1996evaluating,manjikian2001multiprocessor,austin2002simplescalar}.
    SimpleScalar supports the ARM instruction set among many others, and looks
    like a decent simulator for advanced out-of-order core simulation.
    SimpleScalar is also the simulator used by the Wattch-project
    \cite{brooks2000wattch}. However, the SimpleScalar project seems to be in a
    state of abandonment. The source code for SimpleScalar v3 is still available
    and received patches in 2003.

\item[QEMU]\hfill\\
    QEMU is a generic open source machine emulator which enables near real-time
    performance on architectures like ARM, even on x86 host machines
    \cite{bartholomew2006qemu,shen2010full,bellard2005qemu}. However, QEMU is a
    machine emulator rather than an architectural simulator. Despite its great
    performance of running ARM-binaries, it will not produce CPU and memory
    event trace logs, and is not suitable for this project.

\item[gem5]\hfill\\
    gem5 is a merger between the M5 simulator \cite{binkert2006m5} and the GEMS
    simulator project \cite{GEMS}. gem5 includes ARM-support with out-of-order
    execution and provides cycle-accurate trace logs which are appropriate for
    this project \cite{gem5simulator}. Its core is written in C++ and has a
    highly modular interface that allows users to specify simulator targets
    through Python scripts. Many of the maintainers are employees of ARM Corp.,
    and the activity on the mailing lists suggests high project activity
    \cite{gem5dev}.
\end{description}

Provided this comparison of simulators, and given that NTNU has previous
experience with gem5, gem5 was the natural winner and our choice of an
architectural simulator.


\subsection{The gem5 Simulator}

The gem5 project \cite{gem5} merges the best features of M5 \cite{binkert2006m5}
and GEMS \cite{GEMS} and includes a wide range of CPU and memory models
\cite{gem5hipeac}. The simulator has two main execution modes: \textit{Syscall
Emulation} (SE) or \textit{Full System} (FS). In SE mode, the simulator runs
without any real operating system. gem5 traps system calls from the executable
and emulates them, often by passing them to the host operating system. In FS
mode, the simulator can load an entire operating system, e.g., a GNU/Linux
distribution, and run applications within the OS. gem5 supports many
architectures; it can run binaries compiled for ALPHA, SPARC, MIPS, ARM, x86 and
POWER architectures.

During simulation, gem5 keeps track of hundreds of different events related to
the CPU core and memory system. In-detail statistics, similar to performance
counters on real hardware, are then dumped for subsequent inspection. gem5 is
also able to output a trace log while it runs, originally intended for debugging
of gem5. A trace log contains user-selected events that happens within the
simulated hardware. These trace logs grow quickly in size, easily tens of
gigabytes, but provides useful insights of the simulated execution. In
particular, they describes CPU activity down to the microarchitecture level and
outputs simulated processor activity.

