\section{Concept}
The ultimate goal for this project is to model and estimate energy consumption
for unimplemented computer architectures. This allows new ideas to be prototyped
and evaluated with respect to energy efficiency early in the design stage,
easing the process of building energy efficient hardware. These evaluations will
only serve as estimates, and will doubtedly be fully correct. Nevertheless, it
can be used to test specific workloads and applications on specific processor
configurations.

\begin{figure}
    \includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{figs/pet-workflow-gv.pdf}
    \caption{Workflow using PET}
    \label{fig:workflow}
\end{figure}

PET is built by measuring real hardware with great detail, capturing discrete
events and assigning each event a certain energy cost. As depicted in
\autoref{fig:workflow}, when selected events have been weighted, one can run the
test program though a simulator set up to act as the new hardware. The simulator
will generate a tracelog containing the weighted events, and PET can then apply
the numbers. From this workflow, PET can produce a data set containing power
consumption distributed over the simulation lifetime. As noted, the new hardware
will be weighted equally of a chosen existing hardware, so so this method
requires a certain similarity beteen the new and the old hardware. In general,
all traditional architectures contains equal principles of function, and is thus
mappable to each other, but accuracy will of course differ as hardware differs
in design, applied voltage, clock speed and process technology.

When estimating power usage for new architectures, it is hard to tell exactly
how to chose events and how expensive each event is. Therefore, we have to
assume that the new architecture is comparable to an old architecture, and thus
we can use the same power estimation numbers to give a new estimate.
